Depression in children and
young people:
identification and
management
NICE guideline
Published: 25 June 2019
www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng134
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Your responsibility
The recommendations in this guideline represent the view of NICE, arrived at after careful
consideration of the evidence available. When exercising their judgement, professionals
and practitioners are expected to take this guideline fully into account, alongside the
individual needs, preferences and values of their patients or the people using their service.
It is not mandatory to apply the recommendations, and the guideline does not override the
responsibility to make decisions appropriate to the circumstances of the individual, in
consultation with them and their families and carers or guardian.
All problems (adverse events) related to a medicine or medical device used for treatment
or in a procedure should be reported to the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency using the Yellow Card Scheme.
Local commissioners and providers of healthcare have a responsibility to enable the
guideline to be applied when individual professionals and people using services wish to
use it. They should do so in the context of local and national priorities for funding and
developing services, and in light of their duties to have due regard to the need to eliminate
unlawful discrimination, to advance equality of opportunity and to reduce health
inequalities. Nothing in this guideline should be interpreted in a way that would be
inconsistent with complying with those duties.
Commissioners and providers have a responsibility to promote an environmentally
sustainable health and care system and should assess and reduce the environmental
impact of implementing NICE recommendations wherever possible.
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 2 of
49
Contents
Overview .................................................................................................................................... 4
Who is it for? ........................................................................................................................................ 4
Recommendations ..................................................................................................................... 5
1.1 Care of all children and young people with depression ............................................................. 5
1.2 Stepped care .................................................................................................................................. 11
1.3 Step 1: Detection, risk profiling and referral ............................................................................... 13
1.4 Step 2: Recognition of depression in children and young people ............................................ 17
1.5 Step 3: Managing mild depression .............................................................................................. 17
1.6 Steps 4 and 5: Managing moderate to severe depression ....................................................... 20
1.7 Transfer to adult services ............................................................................................................. 31
Terms used in this guideline ............................................................................................................... 32
Recommendations for research ............................................................................................... 34
Key recommendations for research ................................................................................................. 34
Other recommendations for research .............................................................................................. 36
Rationale and impact ................................................................................................................. 38
Treatments for mild depression ......................................................................................................... 38
Treatments for moderate to severe depression ............................................................................... 41
Context ....................................................................................................................................... 45
Safeguarding children ......................................................................................................................... 46
Finding more information and resources ................................................................................ 47
Update information ................................................................................................................... 48
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 3 of
49
This guideline replaces CG28.
This guideline is the basis of QS48.
Overview
This guideline covers identifying and managing depression in children and young people
aged 5 to 18 years. Based on the stepped-care model, it aims to improve recognition and
assessment and promote effective treatments for mild and moderate to severe depression.
Who is it for?
• Healthcare professionals
• Commissioners and providers
• Children and young people with depression and their families and carers
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 4 of
49
Recommendations
People have the right to be involved in discussions and make informed decisions
about their care, as described in NICE's information on making decisions about your
care
Making decisions using NICE guidelines explains how we use words to show the
strength (or certainty) of our recommendations, and has information about
prescribing medicines (including off-label use), professional guidelines, standards
and laws (including on consent and mental capacity), and safeguarding.
1.1 Care of all children and young people with
depression
Good information, informed consent and support
1.1.1 Children and young people and their families need good information,
given as part of a collaborative and supportive relationship with
healthcare professionals, and need to be able to give fully informed
consent. [2005]
1.1.2 Healthcare professionals involved in the detection, assessment or
treatment of children or young people with depression should ensure
that information is provided to the patient and their parents and carers at
an appropriate time. The information should be age appropriate and
should cover the nature, course and treatment of depression, including
the likely side effect profile of medication should this be offered. [2005]
1.1.3 Healthcare professionals involved in the treatment of children or young
people with depression should take time to build a supportive and
collaborative relationship with both the patient and the family or carers.
[2005]
1.1.4 Healthcare professionals should make all efforts necessary to engage
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 5 of
49
the child or young person and their parents or carers in treatment
decisions, taking full account of patient and parental/carer expectations,
so that the patient and their parents or carers can give meaningful and
properly informed consent before treatment is initiated. [2005]
1.1.5 Families and carers should be informed of self-help groups and support
groups and be encouraged to participate in such programmes where
appropriate. [2005]
Language and black, Asian and minority ethnic groups
1.1.6 Where possible, all services should provide written information or
audiotaped material in the language of the child or young person and
their family or carers, and professional interpreters should be sought for
those whose preferred language is not English. [2005]
1.1.7 Consideration should be given to providing psychological therapies and
information about medication and local services in the language of the
child or young person and their family or carers where the patient's and/
or their family's or carer's first language is not English. If this is not
possible, an interpreter should be sought. [2005]
1.1.8 Healthcare professionals in primary, secondary and relevant community
settings should be trained in cultural competence to aid in the diagnosis
and treatment of depression in children and young people from black,
Asian and minority ethnic groups. This training should take into
consideration the impact of the patient's and healthcare professional's
racial identity status on the patient's depression. [2005]
1.1.9 Healthcare professionals working with interpreters should be provided
with joint training opportunities with those interpreters, to ensure that
both healthcare professionals and interpreters understand the specific
requirements of interpretation in a mental health setting. [2005]
1.1.10 The development and evaluation of services for children and young
people with depression should be undertaken in collaboration with
stakeholders involving patients and their families and carers, including
members of black, Asian and minority ethnic groups. [2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 6 of
49
Assessment and coordination of care
1.1.11 When assessing a child or young person with depression, healthcare
professionals should routinely consider, and record in the patient's notes,
potential comorbidities, and the social, educational and family context for
the patient and family members, including the quality of interpersonal
relationships, both between the patient and other family members and
with their friends and peers. [2005]
1.1.12 In the assessment of a child or young person with depression, healthcare
professionals should always ask the patient and their parents or carers
directly about the child or young person's alcohol and drug use, any
experience of being bullied or abused, self-harm and ideas about suicide.
A young person should be offered the opportunity to discuss these
issues initially in private. [2005]
1.1.13 If a child or young person with depression presents acutely having
self-harmed, the immediate management should follow NICE's guideline
on self-harm as this applies to children and young people, paying
particular attention to the guidance on consent and capacity. Further
management should then follow this depression guideline. [2005]
1.1.14 In the assessment of a child or young person with depression, healthcare
professionals should always ask the patient, and be prepared to give
advice, about self-help materials or other methods used or considered
potentially helpful by the patient or their parents or carers. This may
include educational leaflets, helplines, self-diagnosis tools, peer, social
and family support groups, complementary therapies and faith groups.
[2005]
1.1.15 Healthcare professionals should only recommend self-help materials or
strategies as part of a supported and planned package of care. [2005]
1.1.16 For any child or young person with suspected mood disorder, a family
history should be obtained to check for unipolar or bipolar depression in
parents and grandparents. [2005]
1.1.17 When a child or young person has been diagnosed with depression,
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 7 of
49
consideration should be given to the possibility of parental depression,
parental substance misuse, or other mental health problems and
associated problems of living, as these are often associated with
depression in a child or young person and, if untreated, may have a
negative impact on the success of treatment offered to the child or
young person. [2005]
1.1.18 When the clinical progress of children and young people with depression
is being monitored in secondary care, the self-report Mood and Feelings
Questionnaire (MFQ) should be considered as an adjunct to clinical
judgement. [2005]
1.1.19 In the assessment and treatment of depression in children and young
people, special attention should be paid to the issues of:
• confidentiality
• the young person's consent (including Gillick competence)
• parental consent
• child protection
• the use of the Mental Health Act in young people
• the use of the Mental Capacity Act in young people
• the use of the Children Act. [2005, amended 2019]
1.1.20 The form of assessment should take account of cultural and ethnic
variations in communication, family values and the place of the child or
young person within the family. [2005]
The organisation and planning of services
June 2019 – terminology is under revision and may change in the future in line with NHS
England's Future in Mind and the Care Quality Commission's report Are we listening. We
have retained the tiers terminology and will revise this when we update the 2005
recommendations.
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 8 of
49
1.1.21 Healthcare professionals specialising in depression in children and young
people should work with local child and adolescent mental health
services (CAMHS) to enhance specialist knowledge and skills regarding
depression in these existing services. This work should include providing
training and help with guideline implementation. [2005]
1.1.22 CAMHS and local healthcare commissioning organisations should
consider introducing a primary mental health worker (or CAMHS link
worker) into each secondary school and secondary pupil referral unit as
part of tier 2 provision within the locality. [2005]
1.1.23 Primary mental health workers (or CAMHS link workers) should establish
clear lines of communication between CAMHS and tier 1 or 2, with named
contact people in each tier or service, and develop systems for the
collaborative planning of services for young people with depression in
tiers 1 and 2. [2005]
1.1.24 CAMHS and local healthcare commissioning organisations should
routinely monitor the rates of detection, referral and treatment of
children and young people, from all ethnic groups, with mental health
problems, including those with depression, in local schools and primary
care. This information should be used for planning services and made
available for local, regional and national comparison. [2005]
1.1.25 All healthcare and CAMHS professionals should routinely use, and record
in the notes, appropriate outcome measures (such as those self-report
measures used in screening for depression or generic outcome measures
used by particular services, for example Health of the Nation Outcome
Scale for Children and Adolescents [HoNOSCA] or Strengths and
Difficulties Questionnaire [SDQ]), for the assessment and treatment of
depression in children and young people. This information should be
used for planning services, and made available for local, regional and
national comparison. [2005]
Treatment and considerations in all settings
1.1.26 Most children and young people with depression should be treated on an
outpatient or community basis. [2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 9 of
49
1.1.27 Before any treatment is started, healthcare professionals should assess,
together with the young person, the social network around him or her.
This should include a written formulation, identifying factors that may
have contributed to the development and maintenance of depression,
and that may impact both positively or negatively on the efficacy of the
treatments offered. The formulation should also indicate ways that the
healthcare professionals may work in partnership with the social and
professional network of the young person. [2005]
1.1.28 When bullying is considered to be a factor in a child or young person's
depression, CAMHS, primary care and educational professionals should
work collaboratively to prevent bullying and to develop effective
antibullying strategies. [2005]
1.1.29 Psychological therapies used in the treatment of children and young
people with depression should be provided by therapists who are also
trained in child and adolescent mental health. [2005]
1.1.30 Psychological therapies used in the treatment of children and young
people with depression should be provided by healthcare professionals
who have been trained to an appropriate level of competence in the
specific modality of psychological therapy being offered. [2005]
1.1.31 Therapists should develop a treatment alliance with the family. If this
proves difficult, consideration should be given to providing the family
with an alternative therapist. [2005]
1.1.32 Comorbid diagnoses and developmental, social and educational
problems should be assessed and managed, either in sequence or in
parallel, with the treatment for depression. Where appropriate this should
be done through consultation and alliance with a wider network of
education and social care. [2005]
1.1.33 Attention should be paid to the possible need for parents' own
psychiatric problems (particularly depression) to be treated in parallel, if
the child or young person's mental health is to improve. If such a need is
identified, then a plan for obtaining such treatment should be made,
bearing in mind the availability of adult mental health provision and other
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 10 of
49
services. [2005]
1.1.34 A child or young person with depression should be offered advice on the
benefits of regular exercise and encouraged to consider following a
structured and supervised exercise programme of typically up to
3 sessions per week of moderate duration (45 minutes to 1 hour) for
between 10 and 12 weeks. [2005]
1.1.35 A child or young person with depression should be offered advice about
sleep hygiene and anxiety management. [2005]
1.1.36 A child or young person with depression should be offered advice about
nutrition and the benefits of a balanced diet. [2005]
1.2 Stepped care
The stepped-care model of depression draws attention to the different needs of children
and young people with depression – depending on the characteristics of their depression
and their personal and social circumstances – and the responses that are required from
services. It provides a framework in which to organise the provision of services that
support both healthcare professionals and patients and their parents or carers in
identifying and accessing the most effective interventions (see table 1).
Table 1 The stepped-care model
Focus Action Responsibility
Detection Risk profiling Tier 1
Recognition Identification in presenting children or young people Tiers 2 to 4
Mild depression
(including
dysthymia)
Watchful waiting
Digital CBT, group CBT, group IPT or group NDST
If shared decision making based on full assessment
(including maturity and developmental level)
indicates needs not met, individual CBT or
attachment-based family therapy
Tier 1
Tier 1 or 2
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 11 of
49
Focus Action Responsibility
Moderate to
severe
depression (5- to
11-year-olds)
Family-based IPT, family therapy (family-focused
treatment for childhood depression and systems
integrative family therapy), psychodynamic
psychotherapy, or individual CBT
With or without fluoxetine
Tier 2 or 3
Moderate to
severe
depression (12-
to 18-year-olds)
Individual CBT
With or without fluoxetine
If shared decision making based on full assessment
(including maturity and developmental level)
indicates needs not met, IPT-A, family therapy
(attachment-based or systemic), brief psychosocial
intervention or psychodynamic psychotherapy
With or without fluoxetine
Tier 2 or 3
Depression
unresponsive to
treatment/
recurrent
depression/
psychotic
depression
Intensive psychological therapy
With or without fluoxetine, sertraline, citalopram,
augmentation with an antipsychotic
Tier 3 or 4
Abbreviations: CBT, cognitive–behavioural therapy; IPT, interpersonal psychotherapy; IPT
A, IPT for adolescents; NDST, non-directive supportive therapy.
June 2019 – terminology is under revision and may change in the future in line with NHS
England's Future in Mind and the Care Quality Commission's report Are we listening. We
have retained the tiers terminology and will revise this when we update the 2005
recommendations.
The guidance follows these 5 steps:
1. Detection and recognition of depression and risk profiling in primary care and community
settings.
2. Recognition of depression in children and young people referred to Children and Young
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 12 of
49
People's Mental Health Services (including CAMHS).
3. Managing recognised depression in primary care and community settings – mild
depression.
4. Managing recognised depression in tier 2 or 3 CAMHS – moderate to severe depression.
5. Managing recognised depression in tier 3 or 4 CAMHS – unresponsive, recurrent and
psychotic depression, including depression needing inpatient care.
Each step introduces additional interventions; the higher steps assume interventions in the
previous step.
1.3 Step 1: Detection, risk profiling and referral
Detection and risk profiling
See also the recommendations on psychological and social issues in children and young
people in the NICE guideline on diabetes (type 1 and type 2) in children and young people.
1.3.1 Healthcare professionals in primary care, schools and other relevant
community settings should be trained to detect symptoms of depression,
and to assess children and young people who may be at risk of
depression. Training should include the evaluation of recent and past
psychosocial risk factors, such as age, gender, family discord, bullying,
physical, sexual or emotional abuse, comorbid disorders, including drug
and alcohol use, and a history of parental depression; the natural history
of single loss events; the importance of multiple risk factors; ethnic and
cultural factors; and factors known to be associated with a high risk of
depression and other health problems, such as homelessness, refugee
status and living in institutional settings. [2005]
1.3.2 Healthcare professionals in primary care, schools and other relevant
community settings should be trained in communications skills such as
'active listening' and 'conversational technique', so that they can deal
confidently with the acute sadness and distress ('situational dysphoria')
that may be encountered in children and young people following recent
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 13 of
49
undesirable events. [2005]
1.3.3 Healthcare professionals in primary care settings should be familiar with
screening for mood disorders. They should have regular access to
specialist supervision and consultation. [2005]
1.3.4 Healthcare professionals in primary care, schools and other relevant
community settings who are providing support for a child or young
person with situational dysphoria should consider ongoing social and
environmental factors if the dysphoria becomes more persistent. [2005]
1.3.5 CAMHS tier 2 or 3 should work with health and social care professionals
in primary care, schools and other relevant community settings to
provide training and develop ethnically and culturally sensitive systems
for detecting, assessing, supporting and referring children and young
people who are either depressed or at significant risk of becoming
depressed. [2005]
1.3.6 In the provision of training by CAMHS professionals for healthcare
professionals in primary care, schools and relevant community settings,
priority should be given to the training of pastoral support staff in
schools (particularly secondary schools), community paediatricians and
GPs. [2005]
1.3.7 When a child or young person is exposed to a single recent undesirable
life event, such as bereavement, parental divorce or separation or a
severely disappointing experience, healthcare professionals in primary
care, schools and other relevant community settings should undertake an
assessment of the risks of depression associated with the event and
make contact with their parents or carers to help integrate parental/carer
and professional responses. The risk profile should be recorded in the
child or young person's records. [2005]
1.3.8 When a child or young person is exposed to a single recent undesirable
life event, such as bereavement, parental divorce or separation or a
severely disappointing experience, in the absence of other risk factors
for depression, healthcare professionals in primary care, schools and
other relevant community settings should offer support and the
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 14 of
49
opportunity to talk over the event with the child or young person. [2005]
1.3.9 Following an undesirable event, a child or young person should not
normally be referred for further assessment or treatment, as single
events are unlikely to lead to a depressive illness. [2005]
1.3.10 A child or young person who has been exposed to a recent undesirable
life event, such as bereavement, parental divorce or separation or a
severely disappointing experience and is identified to be at high risk of
depression (the presence of 2 or more other risk factors for depression),
should be offered the opportunity to talk over their recent negative
experiences with a professional in tier 1 and assessed for depression.
Early referral should be considered if there is evidence of depression
and/or self-harm. [2005]
1.3.11 When a child or young person is exposed to a recent undesirable life
event, such as bereavement, parental divorce or separation or a severely
disappointing experience, and where 1 or more family members (parents
or children) have multiple risk histories for depression, they should be
offered the opportunity to talk over their recent negative experiences
with a professional in tier 1 and assessed for depression. Early referral
should be considered if there is evidence of depression and/or self-harm.
[2005]
1.3.12 If children and young people who have previously recovered from
moderate or severe depression begin to show signs of a recurrence of
depression, healthcare professionals in primary care, schools or other
relevant community settings should refer them to CAMHS tier 2 or 3 for
rapid assessment. [2005]
Referral criteria
1.3.13 For children and young people, the following factors should be used by
healthcare professionals as indications that management can remain at
tier 1:
• exposure to a single undesirable event in the absence of other risk factors for
depression
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 15 of
49
• exposure to a recent undesirable life event in the presence of 2 or more other
risk factors with no evidence of depression and/or self-harm
• exposure to a recent undesirable life event, where 1 or more family members
(parents or children) have multiple-risk histories for depression, providing that
there is no evidence of depression and/or self-harm in the child or young
person
• mild depression without comorbidity. [2005]
1.3.14 For children and young people, the following factors should be used by
healthcare professionals as criteria for referral to tier 2 or 3 CAMHS:
• depression with 2 or more other risk factors for depression
• depression where 1 or more family members (parents or children) have
multiple-risk histories for depression
• mild depression in those who have not responded to interventions in tier 1 after
2–3 months
• moderate or severe depression (including psychotic depression)
• signs of a recurrence of depression in those who have recovered from previous
moderate or severe depression
• unexplained self-neglect of at least 1 month's duration that could be harmful to
their physical health
• active suicidal ideas or plans
• referral requested by a young person or their parents or carers. [2005]
1.3.15 For children and young people, the following factors should be used by
healthcare professionals as criteria for referral to tier 4 services:
• high recurrent risk of acts of self-harm or suicide
• significant ongoing self-neglect (such as poor personal hygiene or significant
reduction in eating that could be harmful to their physical health)
• requirement for intensity of assessment/treatment and/or level of supervision
that is not available in tier 2 or 3. [2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 16 of
49
1.4 Step 2: Recognition of depression in children
and young people
1.4.1 Children and young people of 11 years or older referred to CAMHS
without a diagnosis of depression should be routinely screened with a
self-report questionnaire for depression as part of a general assessment
procedure. [2005]
1.4.2 Training opportunities should be made available to improve the accuracy
of CAMHS professionals in diagnosing depressive conditions. The
existing interviewer-based instruments (such as Kiddie-Sads [K-SADS]
and Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Assessment [CAPA]) could be used
for this purpose but will require modification for regular use in busy
routine CAMHS settings. [2005]
1.4.3 Within tier 3 CAMHS, professionals who specialise in the treatment of
depression should have been trained in interviewer-based assessment
instruments (such as K-SADS and CAPA) and have skills in non-verbal
assessments of mood in younger children. [2005]
1.5 Step 3: Managing mild depression
Watchful waiting
1.5.1 For children and young people with diagnosed mild depression who do
not want an intervention or who, in the opinion of the healthcare
professional, may recover with no intervention, a further assessment
should be arranged, normally within 2 weeks ('watchful waiting'). [2005]
1.5.2 Healthcare professionals should make contact with children and young
people with depression who do not attend follow-up appointments.
[2005]
Treatments for mild depression
For children and young people with learning disabilities, see the recommendations on
psychological interventions in the NICE guideline on mental health problems in people with
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 17 of
49
learning disabilities.
1.5.3 Antidepressant medication should not be used for the initial treatment of
children and young people with mild depression. [2005]
1.5.4 Discuss the choice of psychological therapies with children and young
people with mild depression and their family members or carers (as
appropriate). Explain:
• what the different therapies involve
• the evidence for each age group (including the limited evidence for 5- to
11-year-olds)
• how the therapies could meet individual needs, preferences and values. [2019]
1.5.5 Base the choice of psychological therapy on:
• a full assessment of needs, including:
－ the circumstances of the child or young person and their family members
or carers
－ their clinical and personal/social history and presentation
－ their maturity and developmental level
－ the context in which treatment is to be provided
－ comorbidities, neurodevelopmental disorders, communication needs
(language, sensory impairment) and learning disabilities
• patient and carer preferences and values (as appropriate). [2019]
1.5.6 For 5- to 11-year-olds with mild depression continuing after 2 weeks of
watchful waiting, and without significant comorbid problems or active
suicidal ideas or plans, consider the following options adapted to
developmental level as needed:
• digital cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT)
• group CBT
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 18 of
49
• group non-directive supportive therapy (NDST)
• group interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT).
If these options would not meet the child's clinical needs or are unsuitable for
their circumstances, consider the following adapted to developmental level as
needed:
• attachment-based family therapy
• individual CBT. [2019]
1.5.7 For 12- to 18-year-olds with mild depression continuing after 2 weeks of
watchful waiting, and without significant comorbid problems or active
suicidal ideas or plans, offer a choice of the following psychological
therapies for a limited period (approximately 2 to 3 months):
• digital CBT
• group CBT
• group NDST
• group IPT. [2019]
1.5.8 If the options in recommendation 1.5.7 would not meet the clinical needs
of a 12- to 18-year-old with mild depression or are unsuitable for their
circumstances, consider:
• attachment-based family therapy or
• individual CBT. [2019]
1.5.9 Provide psychological therapies in settings such as schools and colleges,
primary care, social services and the voluntary sector. [2019]
1.5.10 If mild depression in a child or young person has not responded to
psychological therapy after 2 to 3 months (recommendations 1.5.6 to
1.5.8 and table 1), refer the child or young person for review by a CAMHS
team. [2019]
1.5.11 Follow the recommendations on treating moderate to severe depression
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 19 of
49
for children and young people who have continuing depression after 2 to
3 months of psychological therapy (see the section on moderate to
severe depression). [2019]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on treatments for
mild depression.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
Psychological interventions for the treatment of depression.
1.6 Steps 4 and 5: Managing moderate to severe
depression
Treatments for moderate to severe depression
For children and young people with learning disabilities, see the recommendations on
psychological interventions in the NICE guideline on mental health problems in people with
learning disabilities.
1.6.1 Children and young people presenting with moderate to severe
depression should be reviewed by a CAMHS team. [2019]
1.6.2 Discuss the choice of psychological therapies with children and young
people with moderate to severe depression and their family members or
carers (as appropriate). Explain:
• what the different therapies involve
• the evidence for each age group (including the limited evidence for 5- to
11-year-olds)
• how the therapies could meet individual needs, preferences and values. [2019]
1.6.3 Base the choice of psychological therapy on:
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 20 of
49
• a full assessment of needs, including:
－ the circumstances of the child or young person and their family members
or carers
－ their clinical and personal/social history and presentation
－ their maturity and developmental level
－ the context in which treatment is to be provided
－ comorbidities, neurodevelopmental disorders, communication needs
(language, sensory impairment) and learning disabilities
• patient and carer preferences and values (as appropriate). [2019]
1.6.4 For 5- to 11-year-olds with moderate to severe depression, consider the
following options adapted to developmental level as needed:
• family-based IPT
• family therapy (family-focused treatment for childhood depression and
systems integrative family therapy)
• psychodynamic psychotherapy
• individual CBT. [2019]
1.6.5 For 12- to 18-year-olds with moderate to severe depression, offer
individual CBT for at least 3 months. [2019]
1.6.6 If individual CBT would not meet the clinical needs of a 12- to 18-year-old
with moderate to severe depression or is unsuitable for their
circumstances, consider the following options:
• IPT-A (IPT for adolescents)
• family therapy (attachment-based or systemic)
• brief psychosocial intervention
• psychodynamic psychotherapy. [2019]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 21 of
49
For a short explanation of why the committee made the 2019 recommendations and
how they might affect practice, see the rationale and impact section on treatments for
moderate to severe depression.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
Psychological interventions for the treatment of depression.
Combined treatments for moderate to severe depression
1.6.7 Consider combined therapy (fluoxetine and psychological therapy) for
initial treatment of moderate to severe depression in young people
(12–18 years), as an alternative to psychological therapy followed by
combined therapy and to recommendations 1.6.8 to 1.6.10. [2015]
In June 2019, this was an off-label use of fluoxetine for initial
combination use (fluoxetine with psychological therapy) in children and
young people who have not previously had a trial of psychological
therapy on its own. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines.
1.6.8 If moderate to severe depression in a child or young person is
unresponsive to psychological therapy after 4 to 6 treatment sessions, a
multidisciplinary review should be carried out. [2005]
1.6.9 Following multidisciplinary review, if the child or young person's
depression is not responding to psychological therapy as a result of
other coexisting factors such as the presence of comorbid conditions,
persisting psychosocial risk factors such as family discord, or the
presence of parental mental ill-health, alternative or perhaps additional
psychological therapy for the parent or other family members, or
alternative psychological therapy for the patient, should be considered.
[2005]
1.6.10 Following multidisciplinary review, offer fluoxetine if moderate to severe
depression in a young person (12–18 years) is unresponsive to a specific
psychological therapy after 4 to 6 sessions. [2015]
In June 2019, fluoxetine was the only antidepressant with UK marketing
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 22 of
49
authorisation for use in this indication for children and young people
aged 8 to 18 years.
1.6.11 Following multidisciplinary review, cautiously consider fluoxetine if
moderate to severe depression in a child (5–11 years) is unresponsive to
a specific psychological therapy after 4 to 6 sessions, although the
evidence for fluoxetine's effectiveness in this age group is not
established. [2015]
In June 2019, this was an off-label use of fluoxetine in children under the
age of 8 years. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines.
Depression unresponsive to combined treatment
1.6.12 If moderate to severe depression in a child or young person is
unresponsive to combined treatment with a specific psychological
therapy and fluoxetine after a further 6 sessions, or the patient and/or
their parents or carers have declined the offer of fluoxetine, the
multidisciplinary team should make a full needs and risk assessment.
This should include a review of the diagnosis, examination of the
possibility of comorbid diagnoses, reassessment of the possible
individual, family and social causes of depression, consideration of
whether there has been a fair trial of treatment, and assessment for
further psychological therapy for the patient and/or additional help for
the family. [2005]
1.6.13 Following multidisciplinary review, the following should be considered:
• an alternative psychological therapy, which has not been tried previously
(individual CBT, interpersonal therapy or shorter-term family therapy, of at
least 3 months' duration) or
• systemic family therapy (at least 15 fortnightly sessions) or
• psychodynamic psychotherapy (approximately 30 weekly sessions). [2005]
How to use antidepressants in children and young people
1.6.14 Do not offer antidepressant medication to a child or young person with
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 23 of
49
moderate to severe depression except in combination with a concurrent
psychological therapy. Specific arrangements must be made for careful
monitoring of adverse drug reactions, as well as for reviewing mental
state and general progress; for example, weekly contact with the child or
young person and their parents or carers for the first 4 weeks of
treatment. The precise frequency will need to be decided on an
individual basis, and recorded in the notes. In the event that
psychological therapies are declined, medication may still be given, but
as the young person will not be reviewed at psychological therapy
sessions, the prescribing doctor should closely monitor the child or
young person's progress on a regular basis and focus particularly on
emergent adverse drug reactions. [2015]
1.6.15 If an antidepressant is to be prescribed this should only be following
assessment and diagnosis by a child and adolescent psychiatrist. [2005]
1.6.16 When an antidepressant is prescribed to a child or young person with
moderate to severe depression, it should be fluoxetine as this is the only
antidepressant for which clinical trial evidence shows that the benefits
outweigh the risks. [2005]
In June 2019, this was an off-label use of fluoxetine in children under the
age of 8 years. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines.
1.6.17 If a child or young person is started on antidepressant medication, they
(and their parents or carers, as appropriate) should be informed about
the rationale for the drug treatment, the delay in onset of effect, the time
course of treatment, the possible side effects, and the need to take the
medication as prescribed. Discussion of these issues should be
supplemented by written information appropriate to the child or young
person's and parents' or carers' needs that covers the issues described
above and includes the latest patient information advice from the
relevant regulatory authority. [2005]
1.6.18 A child or young person prescribed an antidepressant should be closely
monitored for the appearance of suicidal behaviour, self-harm or hostility,
particularly at the beginning of treatment, by the prescribing doctor and
the healthcare professional delivering the psychological therapy. Unless
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 24 of
49
it is felt that medication needs to be started immediately, symptoms that
might be subsequently interpreted as side effects should be monitored
for 7 days before prescribing. Once medication is started the patient and
their parents or carers should be informed that if there is any sign of new
symptoms of these kinds, urgent contact should be made with the
prescribing doctor. [2005]
1.6.19 When fluoxetine is prescribed for a child or young person with
depression, the starting dose should be 10 mg daily. This can be
increased to 20 mg daily after 1 week if clinically necessary, although
lower doses should be considered in children of lower body weight.
There is little evidence regarding the effectiveness of doses higher than
20 mg daily. However, higher doses may be considered in older children
of higher body weight and/or when, in severe illness, an early clinical
response is considered a priority. [2005]
In June 2019, this was an off-label use of fluoxetine in children under the
age of 8 years. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines.
1.6.20 When an antidepressant is prescribed in the treatment of a child or
young person with depression and a self-report rating scale is used as an
adjunct to clinical judgement, this should be a recognised scale such as
the MFQ. [2005]
1.6.21 When a child or young person responds to treatment with fluoxetine,
medication should be continued for at least 6 months after remission
(defined as no symptoms and full functioning for at least 8 weeks); in
other words, for 6 months after this 8-week period. [2005]
In June 2019, this was an off-label use of fluoxetine in children under the
age of 8 years. See NICE's information on prescribing medicines.
1.6.22 If treatment with fluoxetine is unsuccessful or is not tolerated because of
side effects, consideration should be given to the use of another
antidepressant. In this case sertraline or citalopram are the
recommended second-line treatments. [2005]
In June 2019, the use in children and young people under 18 of
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 25 of
49
citalopram and sertraline was off label. See NICE's information on
prescribing medicines.
1.6.23 Sertraline or citalopram should only be used when the following criteria
have been met:
• The child or young person and their parents or carers have been fully involved
in discussions about the likely benefits and risks of the new treatment and
have been provided with appropriate written information. This information
should cover the rationale for the drug treatment, the delay in onset of effect,
the time course of treatment, the possible side effects, and the need to take
the medication as prescribed; it should also include the latest patient
information advice from the relevant regulatory authority.
• The child or young person's depression is sufficiently severe and/or causing
sufficiently serious symptoms (such as weight loss or suicidal behaviour) to
justify a trial of another antidepressant.
• There is clear evidence that there has been a fair trial of the combination of
fluoxetine and a psychological therapy (in other words, that all efforts have
been made to ensure adherence to the recommended treatment regimen).
• There has been a reassessment of the likely causes of the depression and of
treatment resistance (for example other diagnoses such as bipolar disorder or
substance misuse).
• There has been advice from a senior child and adolescent psychiatrist – usually
a consultant.
• The child or young person and/or someone with parental responsibility for the
child or young person (or the young person alone, if over 16 or deemed
competent) has signed an appropriate and valid consent form. [2005]
See the MHRA's drug safety update on QT prolongation with citalopram and
escitalopram.
1.6.24 When a child or young person responds to treatment with citalopram or
sertraline, medication should be continued for at least 6 months after
remission (defined as no symptoms and full functioning for at least
8 weeks). [2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 26 of
49
1.6.25 When an antidepressant other than fluoxetine is prescribed for a child or
young person with depression, the starting dose should be half the daily
starting dose for adults. This can be gradually increased to the daily
dose for adults over the next 2 to 4 weeks if clinically necessary,
although lower doses should be considered in children with lower body
weight. There is little evidence regarding the effectiveness of the upper
daily doses for adults in children and young people, but these may be
considered in older children of higher body weight and/or when, in
severe illness, an early clinical response is considered a priority. [2005]
1.6.26 Paroxetine and venlafaxine should not be used for the treatment of
depression in children and young people. [2005]
1.6.27 Tricyclic antidepressants should not be used for the treatment of
depression in children and young people. [2005]
1.6.28 Where antidepressant medication is to be discontinued, the drug should
be phased out over a period of 6 to 12 weeks with the exact dose being
titrated against the level of discontinuation/withdrawal symptoms.
[2005]
1.6.29 As with all other medications, consideration should be given to possible
drug interactions when prescribing medication for depression in children
and young people. This should include possible interactions with
complementary and alternative medicines as well as with alcohol and
'recreational' drugs. [2005]
1.6.30 Although there is some evidence that St John's wort may be of some
benefit in adults with mild to moderate depression, this cannot be
assumed for children or young people, for whom there are no trials upon
which to make a clinical decision. Moreover, it has an unknown
side-effect profile and is known to interact with a number of other drugs,
including contraceptives. Therefore St John's wort should not be
prescribed for the treatment of depression in children and young people.
[2005]
1.6.31 A child or young person with depression who is taking St John's wort as
an over-the-counter preparation should be informed of the risks and
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 27 of
49
advised to discontinue treatment while being monitored for recurrence of
depression and assessed for alternative treatments in accordance with
this guideline. [2005]
The treatment of psychotic depression
1.6.32 For children and young people with psychotic depression, augmenting
the current treatment plan with a second-generation antipsychotic
medication should be considered, although the optimum dose and
duration of treatment are unknown. [2005]
In June 2019, the use of all second-generation antipsychotics for children
and young people under 18 was off label. See NICE's information on
prescribing medicines.
1.6.33 Children and young people prescribed a second-generation
antipsychotic medication should be monitored carefully for side effects.
[2005]
See also the recommendations on choice of antipsychotics and how to use them in the
NICE guideline on psychosis and schizophrenia in children and young people.
Inpatient care
1.6.34 Inpatient treatment should be considered for children and young people
who present with a high risk of suicide, high risk of serious self-harm or
high risk of self-neglect, and/or when the intensity of treatment (or
supervision) needed is not available elsewhere, or when intensive
assessment is indicated. [2005]
1.6.35 When considering admission for a child or young person with depression,
the benefits of inpatient treatment need to be balanced against potential
detrimental effects, for example loss of family and community support.
[2005]
1.6.36 When inpatient treatment is indicated, CAMHS professionals should
involve the child or young person and their parents or carers in the
admission and treatment process whenever possible. [2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 28 of
49
1.6.37 Commissioners should ensure that inpatient treatment is available within
reasonable travelling distance to enable the involvement of families and
maintain social links. [2005]
1.6.38 Commissioners should ensure that inpatient services are able to admit a
young person within an appropriate timescale, including immediate
admission if necessary. [2005]
1.6.39 Inpatient services should have a range of interventions available
including medication, individual and group psychological therapies and
family support. [2005]
1.6.40 Inpatient facilities should be age appropriate and culturally enriching,
with the capacity to provide appropriate educational and recreational
activities. [2005]
1.6.41 Planning for aftercare arrangements should take place before admission
or as early as possible after admission and should be based on the Care
Programme Approach. [2005]
1.6.42 Tier 4 CAMHS professionals involved in assessing children or young
people for possible inpatient admission should be specifically trained in
issues of consent and capacity, the use of current mental health
legislation and the use of childcare laws, as they apply to this group of
patients. [2005]
Electroconvulsive therapy
1.6.43 Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) should only be considered for young
people with very severe depression and either life-threatening symptoms
(such as suicidal behaviour) or intractable and severe symptoms that
have not responded to other treatments. [2005]
1.6.44 ECT should be used extremely rarely in young people and only after
careful assessment by a practitioner experienced in its use and only in a
specialist environment in accordance with NICE recommendations.
[2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 29 of
49
1.6.45 ECT is not recommended in the treatment of depression in children
(5–11 years). [2005]
Discharge after a first episode
1.6.46 When a child or young person is in remission (fewer than 2 symptoms
and full functioning for at least 8 weeks), they should be reviewed
regularly for 12 months by an experienced CAMHS professional. The
exact frequency of contact should be agreed between the CAMHS
professional and the child or young person and/or the parents or carers
and recorded in the notes. At the end of this period, if remission is
maintained, the young person can be discharged to primary care. [2005]
1.6.47 CAMHS should keep primary care professionals up to date about
progress and the need for monitoring of the child or young person in
primary care. CAMHS should also inform relevant primary care
professionals within 2 weeks of a patient being discharged and should
provide advice about whom to contact in the event of a recurrence of
depressive symptoms. [2005]
1.6.48 Children and young people who have been successfully treated and
discharged but then re-referred should be seen as soon as possible
rather than placed on a routine waiting list. [2005]
Recurrent depression and relapse prevention
1.6.49 Specific follow-up psychological therapy sessions to reduce the
likelihood of, or at least detect, a recurrence of depression should be
considered for children and young people who are at a high risk of
relapse (for example individuals who have already experienced 2 prior
episodes, those who have high levels of subsyndromal symptoms, or
those who remain exposed to multiple-risk circumstances). [2005]
1.6.50 CAMHS specialists should teach recognition of illness features, early
warning signs, and subthreshold disorders to tier 1 professionals,
children or young people with recurrent depression and their families and
carers. Self-management techniques may help individuals to avoid and/or
cope with trigger factors. [2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 30 of
49
1.6.51 When a child or young person with recurrent depression is in remission
(fewer than 2 symptoms and full functioning for at least 8 weeks), they
should be reviewed regularly for 24 months by an experienced CAMHS
professional. The exact frequency of contact should be agreed between
the CAMHS professional and the child or young person and/or the
parents or carers and recorded in the notes. At the end of this period, if
remission is maintained, the young person can be discharged to primary
care. [2005]
1.6.52 Children and young people with recurrent depression who have been
successfully treated and discharged but then re-referred should be seen
as a matter of urgency. [2005]
1.7 Transfer to adult services
See also the NICE guideline on transition from children's to adults' services for young
people using health or social care services.
1.7.1 The CAMHS team currently providing treatment and care for a young
person aged 17 who is recovering from a first episode of depression
should normally continue to provide treatment until discharge is
considered appropriate in accordance with this guideline, even when the
person turns 18 years of age. [2005]
1.7.2 The CAMHS team currently providing treatment and care for a young
person aged 17–18 who either has ongoing symptoms from a first
episode that are not resolving or has, or is recovering from, a second or
subsequent episode of depression, should normally arrange for a transfer
to adult mental health services, informed by the Care Programme
Approach. [2005]
1.7.3 A young person aged 17–18 with a history of recurrent depression who is
being considered for discharge from CAMHS should be provided with
comprehensive information about the treatment of depression in adults
(including NICE's information for the public) and information about local
services and support groups suitable for young adults with depression.
[2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 31 of
49
1.7.4 A young person aged 17–18 who has successfully recovered from a first
episode of depression and is discharged from CAMHS should not
normally be referred on to adult services, unless they are considered to
be at high risk of relapse (for example, if they are living in multiple-risk
circumstances). [2005]
Terms used in this guideline
Tiers
June 2019 – The tiers terminology is under revision and may change in the future in line
with NHS England's Future in Mind and the Care Quality Commission's report Are we
listening. We have retained the tiers terminology and will revise this when the 2005
recommendations are updated.
The Care Quality Commission's report 'Are we listening' referred to the whole system of
care and support (tiers 1 to 4) as Children and Young People's Mental Health Services.
These included counselling provided through schools or GP practices, youth services,
voluntary sector advice and support, and universal healthcare services like health visitors,
as well as CAMHS. They used CAMHS to refer to services offering specialist care in the
community (tier 3) and inpatient care (tier 4).
Brief psychosocial intervention
This intervention is based on the brief psychosocial intervention (BPI) carried out in the
IMPACT trial (Goodyer et al. 2017).
Core components of BPI include:
• psychoeducation about depression and action-oriented, goal-focused, interpersonal
activities as therapeutic strategies
• building health habits
• planning and scheduling valued activities
• advice on maintaining and improving mental and physical hygiene including sleep, diet
and exercise
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 32 of
49
• promoting engagement with and maintaining school work and peer relations, and
diminishing solitariness.
BPI does not involve cognitive or reflective analytic techniques.
Digital CBT
Digital CBT is a form of CBT delivered using digital technology, such as a computer, tablet
or phone. A variety of digital CBT programmes have been used for young people aged
12 to 18 years with mild depression. These include SPARX, Stressbusters and Grasp the
Opportunity. Only Stressbusters has been tested in the UK. Some digital CBT interventions
are supported by contact with a healthcare professional but in other cases there may be
no additional support.
Common components of digital CBT programmes include: psychoeducation, relaxation,
analysis of behaviour, behavioural activation, basic communication and interpersonal skills,
emotional recognition, dealing with strong emotions, problem solving, cognitive
restructuring (identifying thoughts, challenging unhelpful/negative thoughts), mindfulness
and relapse prevention.
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 33 of
49
Recommendations for research
Key recommendations for research
1 Psychological therapies for children aged 5 to 11 years with mild
or moderate to severe depression
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness, post-treatment and at longer-term follow-up,
of psychological therapies in children aged 5 to 11 years with mild or moderate to severe
depression? [2019]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale on treatments for mild depression or moderate to severe depression.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
Psychological interventions for the treatment of depression.
2 Digital cognitive–behavioural therapy
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness, post-treatment and at longer-term follow-up,
of supported digital cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT) compared with unsupported
digital CBT in young people aged 12 to 18 years with mild depression, and what are the
key components of the interventions that influence effectiveness? [2019]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale on treatments for mild depression.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
Psychological interventions for the treatment of depression.
3 Family therapy, interpersonal psychotherapy for adolescents
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 34 of
49
and psychodynamic psychotherapy
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness, post-treatment and at longer-term follow-up,
of family therapy, psychodynamic psychotherapy and interpersonal psychotherapy for
adolescents (IPT-A) compared with each other and with individual CBT in young people
aged 12 to 18 years with moderate to severe depression? [2019]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale on treatments for moderate to severe depression.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
Psychological interventions for the treatment of depression.
4 Brief psychosocial intervention delivered by non-psychiatrists
and in other settings
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness, post-treatment and at longer-term follow-up,
of a brief psychosocial intervention as reported by the IMPACT trial, but delivered by
practitioners other than psychiatrists and in other settings, including primary care, to
young people aged 12 to 18 years with mild or moderate to severe depression? [2019]
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale on moderate to severe depression.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
Psychological interventions for the treatment of depression.
5 Behavioural activation
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness, post treatment and at longer-term follow-up, of
behavioural activation compared with other psychological therapies in children aged 5 to
11 years and young people aged 12 to 18 years with mild or moderate to severe
depression? [2019]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 35 of
49
For a short explanation of why the committee made the recommendation for research,
see the rationale for treatments for mild depression or moderate to severe depression.
Full details of the evidence and the committee's discussion are in evidence review A:
Psychological interventions for the treatment of depression.
Other recommendations for research
Group mindfulness
What is the clinical and cost effectiveness, post treatment and at longer-term follow-up, of
group mindfulness compared with other psychological therapies in young people aged
12 to 18 years with mild depression? [2019]
Combination therapy (fluoxetine and psychological therapy)
An appropriately blinded, randomised controlled trial should be conducted to assess the
efficacy (including measures of family and social functioning as well as depression) and
the cost effectiveness of fluoxetine, psychological therapy, the combination of fluoxetine
and psychological therapy compared with each other and placebo in a broadly based
sample of children and young people diagnosed with moderate to severe depression
(using minimal exclusion criteria).The trial should be powered to examine the effect of
treatment in children and young people separately and involve a follow-up of 12 to
18 months (but no less than 6 months). [2015]
Care pathway experience
A qualitative study should be conducted that examines the experiences in the care
pathway of children and young people and their families (and perhaps professionals) in
order to inform decisions about what the most appropriate care pathway should be.
[2005]
Computer technology to assess mood and feelings
An appropriately designed study should be conducted to compare validated screening
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 36 of
49
instruments for the detection of depression in children and young people. An emphasis
should be placed on examining those that use computer technology and more child-
friendly methods of assessing current mood and feelings, and take into account cultural
and ethnic variations in communication, family values and the place of the child or young
person within the family. [2005]
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 37 of
49
Rationale and impact
These sections briefly explain why the committee made the recommendations and how
they might affect practice. They link to details of the evidence and a full description of the
committee's discussion.
Treatments for mild depression
Recommendations 1.5.4 to 1.5.11
Why the committee made the recommendations
Making choices about treatments
To ensure that children and young people with depression and their families or carers (as
appropriate) receive the best possible care and can take part in shared decision making,
the committee recommended that healthcare professionals explain the treatment options,
what these are like in practice and how different psychological therapies might best suit
individual clinical needs, preferences and values. The discussion should also cover the
evidence for the different treatments and make it clear that there is limited evidence for
effective treatments for 5- to 11-year-olds.
The committee recognised that some children and young people have difficulties
accessing treatment because of lack of transport (particularly in rural areas), chaotic
family lives, being in a young offender's institute or being in care. They agreed that the
healthcare professional should not only think about clinical needs, but also take into
account the child or young person's personal/social history, the current environment, the
setting where the treatment will be provided and individual preferences and values. In
addition, certain therapies may not be suitable or may need to be adapted for use with
children generally or those with comorbidities, neurodevelopmental disorders, learning
disabilities or different communication needs (due to language or sensory impairment). To
ensure that these factors are part of the decision-making process, the committee included
them in the full assessment of needs.
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 38 of
49
Psychological therapies for 5- to 11-year-olds with mild depression
The evidence for psychological therapies for 5- to 11-year-olds was confined to group
cognitive–behavioural therapy (CBT), and although depression symptoms were reduced at
the end of treatment compared with waiting list/no treatment, this was not maintained in
the longer term. There were no data for other outcomes such as functional status or
remission. As a result, the committee decided to recommend the same interventions that
were effective in 12- to 18-year-olds for this age group, but adapted for their age and
developmental level.
Because of the limited evidence for effective treatments for 5- to 11-year-olds with mild
depression, the committee made a research recommendation on psychological therapies
for children aged 5 to 11 years with mild or moderate to severe depression to try to
stimulate research in this area.
Psychological therapies for 12- to 18-year-olds with mild depression
Analysis of the evidence for 12- to 18-year-olds with mild depression showed that digital
CBT (also known as online CBT or computer CBT), group therapies (group CBT, group
interpersonal psychotherapy [IPT] and group non-directive supportive therapy [NDST]),
individual CBT and family therapy reduced depression symptoms or improved functional
status by the end of treatment and up to 6 months later compared with a waiting list
control or no treatment. In some cases, such as digital CBT, these positive effects
persisted for longer than 6 months, but information on long-term effects was not always
available. Digital CBT was also better than other psychological therapies at reducing
depression symptoms longer term.
The committee agreed to base recommendations for psychological therapies on clinical
effectiveness and cost. The average costs estimated for digital CBT and group therapy
(CBT, IPT and NDST) were lower than those for individual CBT and family therapy. Taking
the magnitude of effect, the estimated cost and the size of the evidence base into
account, the committee agreed that a choice of digital CBT, group IPT, group NDST or
group CBT should be offered first.
However, the committee recognised that digital CBT is not well defined and the evidence
for effectiveness came from studies using a variety of different programmes. In addition,
digital CBT can be delivered with support (from a healthcare professional) or as an
unsupported intervention. It is unclear whether unsupported or supported digital CBT is
more effective and which programmes would be most effective for use in the UK. As a
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 39 of
49
result, the committee made a research recommendation on digital CBT to inform future
guidance.
Individual CBT and family therapy were among the more expensive options. Individual CBT
had a smaller effect on depression symptoms than digital CBT or group therapy (CBT, IPT
or NDST). Individual CBT had a meaningful effect on functional status; this outcome was
only reported in a study that recruited young people with depression and a comorbidity.
Family therapy showed meaningful effects on depression symptoms, but these results
were based on a single study.
The committee acknowledged that digital CBT, group CBT, group IPT and group NDST
may not be suitable for everyone and that individual CBT or family therapy could be
considered in these situations. They specified attachment-based family therapy in the
recommendation because that was the type of family therapy used in the study.
The committee agreed not to make a recommendation for individual NDST or guided self-
help because:
• Individual NDST was not more effective at reducing depression symptoms at the end
of treatment or at 6 months' follow-up than control and there was no evidence for
functional status or remission.
• Although guided self-help reduced depression symptoms at the end of treatment
compared with a waiting list control/no treatment, this was not sustained at later time
points. In addition, guided self-help was no more effective at reducing depression
symptoms at the end of treatment, and was either less effective or no more effective
at later time points, than the recommended group therapies (group CBT, group IPT,
group NDST), digital CBT, individual CBT or family therapy.
The committee made a research recommendation on behavioural activation aimed at
investigating the effectiveness of behavioural activation compared with other
psychological therapies. They agreed that behavioural activation may meet the needs of
some children and young people with depression that are not already covered by the other
recommended psychological therapies. In particular, it might suit children and young
people who struggle with the concepts of CBT, and children and young people with
learning disabilities or neurodevelopmental disorders. The only evidence for behavioural
activation came from a single small study (60 participants) that found no difference
between behavioural activation and usual care, but this may have been because of the
small study size.
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 40 of
49
The committee also made a research recommendation for group mindfulness, because,
although it was more effective at reducing depression symptoms post treatment and at
6 months' follow-up than a waiting list control/no treatment, there was no evidence for
other key outcomes such as functional status or later time points, and the evidence came
from a single small study.
How the recommendations might affect practice
The recommendation for digital CBT or group therapy (CBT, IPT or NDST) for children and
young people with mild depression is not likely to result in increased resource use. It may
even result in lower resource use if these interventions reduce the need for intensive
individual therapies. Individual NDST and guided self-help are no longer recommended
and the net resource impact of this change is therefore unclear.
Return to recommendations
Treatments for moderate to severe depression
Recommendations 1.6.1 to 1.6.6
Why the committee made the recommendations
Making choices about treatments
As for mild depression, the committee agreed that children and young people and their
families or carers should be empowered to take part in shared decision making. Healthcare
professional should also think about a number of key factors, including history, individual
circumstances, comorbidities and developmental level and maturity.
Psychological therapies for 5- to 11-year-olds with moderate to severe
depression
There was some evidence for psychological therapies for children aged 5 to 11 years with
moderate to severe depression, but this included very few interventions. The committee
agreed that the child or young person and their family or carers should be made aware of
this when making decisions about treatments.
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 41 of
49
In the analysis of evidence for 5- to 11-year-olds with moderate to severe depression,
family-based IPT and family therapy were more effective at reducing depression
symptoms at the end of treatment than psychodynamic psychotherapy; but
psychodynamic psychotherapy was better than family therapy at maintaining remission
6 months later. However, the evidence base was small (3 studies) and none included a
control intervention. In other studies that included a control, no interventions were better
than the control at reducing depression symptoms after treatment or at later time points.
Despite the limited evidence for 5- to 11-year-olds, the committee agreed that treatment
was important for these young children. They agreed to recommend the treatments (family
therapy, family-based IPT and psychodynamic psychotherapy) for which there was some
evidence. They specified the types of family therapy used in the studies (family-focused
treatment for childhood depression and systems integrative family therapy). They also
included individual CBT in the recommendation because it was the most effective
treatment for 12- to 18-year-olds with moderate to severe depression and they agreed
that more mature children might benefit from this intervention.
Because of the limited evidence for effective treatments for 5- to 11-year-olds with
depression, the committee made a research recommendation on psychological therapies
for children aged 5 to 11 years with mild or moderate to severe depression to inform future
guidance.
Psychological therapies for 12- to 18-year-olds with moderate to severe
depression
In an analysis of a large body of evidence for 12- to 18-year-olds with moderate to severe
depression, individual CBT was better at reducing depression symptoms and improving
functional status, quality of life and suicidal ideas compared with waiting list/no treatment,
or usual care. It also increased remission at the end of treatment compared with attention
control and other therapies (such as family therapy). Based on the size of these effects,
the number of outcomes showing improvement and the size of the evidence base, the
committee agreed to recommend individual CBT as the first-line treatment for young
people with moderate to severe depression.
However, the committee recognised that individual CBT might not be suitable or meet the
needs of all young people with moderate to severe depression and so they agreed that
other therapies (IPT-A [IPT for adolescents], family therapy, brief psychosocial intervention
[BPI] and psychodynamic psychotherapy) could be considered as second-line options
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 42 of
49
because there was some evidence supporting them, but this was less certain.
IPT-A and family therapy both increased functional status and depression symptoms at the
end of treatment compared with waiting list/no treatment, or usual care (4 studies each).
Family therapy was also better at inducing remission at the end of treatment than
attention control.
The IMPACT trial could not detect a difference between BPI, psychodynamic
psychotherapy and individual CBT over a range of outcomes and follow-up times for 12- to
18-year-olds with moderate to severe depression. The committee agreed that BPI could be
considered as an option when individual CBT is unsuitable. But they acknowledged that
further research would be helpful to determine the effectiveness of BPI when delivered by
a wider range of less senior practitioners and in other settings such as primary care. So
they made a research recommendation on BPI delivered by non-psychiatrists and in other
settings.
Psychodynamic psychotherapy increased remission at the end of treatment compared
with attention control or family therapy and relaxation. However, there was no evidence for
functional status and psychodynamic psychotherapy was not more effective than control
at relieving depression symptoms or improving quality of life post treatment. The data for
this analysis came from the IMPACT trial, which found no detectable differences between
the effectiveness of psychodynamic psychotherapy and individual CBT across a range of
outcomes and follow-up times. However, a second trial of this intervention was identified
with participants that spanned both age groups. It was included in the analysis for 5- to
11-year-olds. The committee decided not to recommend psychodynamic psychotherapy
as a first-line option because it was no better than control at reducing depression
symptoms at the end of treatment and there were only 2 studies including this
intervention.
The committee recognised that there were fewer studies of family therapy, IPT-A and
psychodynamic psychotherapy than for individual CBT, and the existing studies either
lacked data for later follow-up times or did not cover the full range of outcomes of interest.
The committee wanted more evidence to support their use in young people with moderate
to severe depression and they therefore made a research recommendation on family
therapy, IPT-A and psychodynamic psychotherapy to look at the relative effectiveness of
these interventions compared with each other and individual CBT.
The committee agreed that behavioural activation may meet the specific needs of some
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 43 of
49
children and young people with depression. In particular, it might suit those who might
struggle with the concepts of CBT and children and young people with learning disabilities
or neurodevelopmental disorders. They made a research recommendation on behavioural
activation to inform future practice.
How the recommendations might affect practice
Individual CBT, family therapy, psychodynamic psychotherapy and IPT-A are already in
widespread use and, as a result, the recommendations are unlikely to change resource
use. Brief psychosocial intervention is not commonly delivered in current practice.
Although this represents a change in practice, it is a lower intensity intervention than other
individual therapies and may therefore reduce overall resource use.
Return to recommendations
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 44 of
49
Context
This guideline covers the identification and treatment of depression in children (5 to
11 years) and young people (12 to 18 years) in primary, community and secondary care.
Depression is a broad diagnosis that can include different symptoms in different people.
However, depressed mood or loss of pleasure in most activities, are key signs of
depression. Depressive symptoms are frequently accompanied by symptoms of anxiety,
but may also occur on their own.
The International Statistical Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) uses an agreed list of
10 depressive symptoms, and divides depression into 4 categories: not depressed (fewer
than 4 symptoms), mild depression (4 symptoms), moderate depression
(5 to 6 symptoms), and severe depression (7 or more symptoms, with or without psychotic
symptoms). For a diagnosis of depression, symptoms should be present for at least
2 weeks and every symptom should be present for most of the day.
For the purposes of this guideline, the management of depression has been divided into
the following categories as defined by the ICD-10:
• mild depression
• moderate and severe depression
• severe depression with psychotic symptoms.
However, it is unlikely that the severity of depression can be understood in a single
symptom count or visit. A child or young person may present initially with psychosomatic
symptoms, and may need to be seen on more than one occasion with parents/carers and
without, if appropriate, in order to gain trust. Therefore, beyond single symptom count,
family context, previous history, and the degree of associated impairment are all important
in helping to assess the severity of depression. Because of this, it is important to assess
how the child or young person functions in different settings (for example, at school, with
peers and with family), as well as asking about specific symptoms of depression.
Children and young people's mental health services are NHS priorities for care quality and
outcomes improvement within the NHS Long Term Plan. As part of the plan, services will
be expanded and will receive more funding. This includes the expansion of community-
based mental health services to meet the needs of more children and young people and
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 45 of
49
the improvement of mental health support for children and young people in school and
colleges.
Safeguarding children
Remember that child maltreatment:
• is common
• can present anywhere, such as emergency departments and primary care or on home
visits.
Be aware of or suspect abuse as a contributory factor to or cause of the symptoms or
signs of depression in children. Abuse may also coexist with depression. See the NICE
guideline on child maltreatment for clinical features that may be associated with
maltreatment.
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 46 of
49
Finding more information and resources
You can see everything NICE says on this topic in the NICE Pathway on depression in
children and young people.
To find NICE guidance on related topics, including guidance in development, see the NICE
web page on depression.
For full details of the evidence and the guideline committee's discussions, see the
evidence review. You can also find information about how the guideline was developed,
including details of the committee.
NICE has produced tools and resources to help you put this guideline into practice. For
general help and advice on putting NICE guidelines into practice, see resources to help
you put guidance into practice.
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 47 of
49
Update information
June 2019: We have reviewed the evidence and made new recommendations on
psychological therapies for children and young people with depression. These
recommendations are marked [2019].
We have also made 1 change without an evidence review:
• the Mental Capacity Act has been added to the considerations when assessing and
treating depression in young people.
This recommendation is marked [2005, amended 2019].
Recommendations marked [2005] or [2015] last had an evidence review in 2005 or 2015.
In some cases, minor changes have been made to the wording to bring the language and
style up to date, without changing the meaning.
September 2017: Recommendation 1.1.29 was updated to clarify the training needed for
therapists. Recommendation 1.4.1 was updated to delete reference to a preferred
questionnaire as this is no longer relevant.
March 2015: We reviewed the evidence and made new recommendations for combination
therapy for children and young people with depression. These recommendations are
marked [2015].
ISBN: 978-1-4731-1041-0
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 48 of
49
Accreditation
Depression in children and young people: identification and management (NG134)
© NICE 2023. All rights reserved. Subject to Notice of rights (https://www.nice.org.uk/terms-and-
conditions#notice-of-rights).
Page 49 of
49